so you guys are probably thinking what
the heck Paul why do you keep teasing us
with these little tidbits from your HTPC
build that you've promised us for so
long with that actually going through
with it and I guess I get some sort of
twisted pleasure out of it is what it
comes down to but today's video is
dealing with some of the parts for my
HTPC build that i put together over two
years ago but I wanted to revisit
something that I did also two years ago
which was this passive cooler that's
installed on here this is the no fancy
r95 C 95 watt completely passive cooler
two years ago I used it to cool the rise
in 717 hundred first gen rise an
eight-core processor it did a great job
because that chip has a TDP of 65 watts
what I'm going to do today is see if
this cooler again with the 95 watt TDP
rating can handle this processor the
3900 X 12 core 105 watt TDP processor so
I'm gonna install it let's see what
happens
cooler masters MK 730 gaming mechanical
keyboard is the more portable version of
their flagship master keys 750 and
features the same premium brushed
aluminum finished and floating key
design as well as genuine Cherry MX
switches in blue brown or red use the
function keys for on-the-fly RGB LED
control admire the stylish bottom inside
light bars and feel the comfort of the
removable wrist rest in a 10 keyless
form factor that you can easily take on
the go
it's got USB type-c too so click the
sponsor link in the description for more
so a couple things to point out before
we dive into this first off this cooler
has actually been around for quite some
time as such it launched prior to am for
being a thing which means it only has am
three support I happen to have this
motherboard that its installed on right
now which is the crosshair six hero and
if you guys remember back in the 300
series launched Asus did a bit of
manufacturing juju with this to make
sure it had both an AM 4 and an AM 3
mounts on it so I'm in a unique position
with this motherboard and this cooler to
set this test up because you gotta have
an AM 3 mount with an AM 4 motherboard
before I have to take this to the 3000
series processor though I need to update
the BIOS to make sure it will actually
work with this processor as I did
recently with a bunch of my motherboards
but I did not yet do it with this one
once I do get the BIOS update and the
CPU installed I'll be running a few
tests and I'm going to be comparing
these to the tests I ran two years ago
with the 1700 installed in those tests I
did an idle
and i-264 test and also a gaming test so
I'll be doing those once again the last
time I compared a liquid cooler to the
performance of this air cooler this time
around I'm going to be using the Box
cooler that ships with this which is the
wraith prism and we'll see how that
performs compared to this fanless cooler
and again how did in five watt TDP 95
watt rated cooler so I'm just a little
bit curious to see how this actually
goes step one of this process
fortunately wasn't too difficult just
removing the 3900 X from the system I
built last month so I have it to be
installed step two was updating the UEFI
on this motherboard which actually took
a little bit more effort than I thought
the old UEFI or BIOS that was running on
was version 1403 which was from June
22nd 2017 about two years ago I was just
trying to do a direct update to the most
recent BIOS which is version 7 306 which
was literally released last week so
again
props to Asus for doing constant regular
bass updates for a lot of their older
boards although a lot of the motherboard
manufacturers have been doing that for
300 and 400 series boards because they
do have forward compatibility but
unfortunately I wasn't able to do the
in-place update it was just hanging when
I was trying to access the UEFI files so
I had to do a couple in-between updates
I got it to update from 1403 230 502
which was January 2018 from 3 502 I went
to 6 101 which was from April 2019 and
then I was able to update it to 7 306 so
we are now on the latest updated BIOS
I've now also removed the rest of the
hardware from the motherboard so you
guys can get a closer look at just how
dusty this thing has gotten over the
past couple years it is pretty
impressive in particular down here just
below the PCI Express slot where the
graphics card sits in there it's been
running on the C vga GT x 1080 for the
win 2 which does have 0 fan mode but
it's still spinning this one fan 100% of
the time for reasons I have not quite
determined but for that reason there's a
lot of dust right there also a lot of
dust around the CPU socket some cobwebs
some other stuff we got some close-up
shots of it so you guys could take a
closer look and be grossed out I am
going to now dust off this motherboard
I'm going to use a vacuum which I don't
typically recommend because it is a
little bit of a static electricity
hazard but I'm going to take a shortcut
and hope
don't regret it later then once that's
done I can drop in the 3900
X to get some baseline numbers with the
Wraith prism cooler and then try out the
CR 95 see
[Music]
I'm to be honest I think the most
satisfying part of today's video was
actually cleaning this motherboard off
it was really really dusty so I hope you
guys at least get a little bit of
satisfaction out of that
as mentioned using a vacuum is not
recommended directly up against the PCB
of a motherboard or something like this
the main reason is a potential for
building up static electricity and
shocks there's also the possibility that
you might suck surface mounted devices
straight off of the PCB if you go right
up against it with the suction or
something like that Joe actually
recommended dusting with the vacuum
right next to it and that helped get a
lot of the dust out of the nooks and
crannies in between there but that's not
what you guys are here for you're here
for the testing to see if this family's
cooler could cool the 3900 x short
answer is yes yes it could longer answer
is there are some caveats involved so
starting off with our comparison numbers
with the wraith prism here which is the
Box cooler that ships with some of the
higher ends 3000 series processors which
actually does a pretty decent job it has
a copper contact at the bottom copper
heat types that make direct contact with
the CPU and it has our GB now the
downside of this was of course that the
famous spinning and I well I didn't get
any actual sound measurements here I can
just tell you yes it was making noise as
compared to this which is quite
surprisingly enough there's not a fan
attached to it that aside though when
the system was just running at idle the
minimum temperature what the Wraith
prison was thirty eight point eight
degrees Celsius on average it was
fluctuating between about 44 and 45
degrees Celsius was spiking up to
between 45 and 55 degrees Celsius and I
noted that seemed to coincide with
single core spikes which were ramping up
to about 4.5 4 gigahertz for a single
core at a time this was just doing
background stuff with the system I tried
to make sure to get it as idle as
possible so these temps are a little bit
on the warm side when you're just
talking about idling but you have to
keep in mind it's a 12 core processor
and this is again the Box cooler that
ships with it next I fired up the I 264
stress test again this is just what the
rates prism we were hitting eighty nine
point five to ninety degrees Celsius on
average and this was with the CPU
running all cores between three point
nine and four point zero one seven
gigahertz it did hit four point zero
four two gigahertz max but these are the
expected temperatures we would see with
the stress test across all twelve cores
with a box cooler finally for gaming
which
ta 5 we played for about 15 minutes and
I didn't notice any significant downside
to the gameplay or anything we weren't
really encountering any major hiccups or
anything like that
we were running at fifty nine point nine
degrees Celsius on average max
temperature was sixty nine point five
degrees Celsius so a decent showing I'd
say for the Wraiths prism it's pretty
much what you would expect when it comes
to a box cooler but I think with the
3900 X you'd probably want to go for a
bit better of a cooler than the Box
cooler just because I think there's more
performance to be had and you can run at
higher sustained frequencies with a
better cooler now the CR 95 C is not
necessarily a better cooler except in
that it is fanless and it is completely
silent
but again that's rated for 95 watts of
heat dissipation so we are definitely
stressing it with a hundred and five
watt TDP 3900 X we can see that pretty
immediately when it comes to the idle
temperatures we were at forty seven
point six degrees Celsius minimum with
an average of between 52 and sixty
degrees Celsius it was still ramping up
core frequencies it got a single-core up
to four point four nine gigahertz
maximum and this was just as it was
doing basic system startup stuff these
temperatures were taken after about 10
minutes of boot up we then moved on to
the Ida 64 stress test and here we are
hitting very very hot temperatures this
was expected ninety-five point one two
ninety five point three degrees Celsius
on average with a maximum temperature of
105 point four degrees that's way hotter
than I would want my CPU to run and it
also makes the CR 95 C extremely hot as
well it's actually still pretty hot
right now but under the stress test like
it'll probably burn you if you were to
keep your hand up against it for more
than a second or two so it does become a
little bit of a hazard at that point as
well but but since as stated we are
running this 95 watt cooler on 105 watt
TDP CPU I think it's impressive that the
system was able to run we were able to
run the stress test for over 10 minutes
but the reason it didn't overheat and
shut itself down is simply because the
CPU itself throttled itself back to make
sure that it wasn't going to overheat
after I hit 95 degrees the first time it
pretty much stayed with that at them as
the max temperature it only had that one
time where it peaked up to over 105 it
did this by dialing the voltage back
sometimes it can run between one point
three and one point four volts but it
was running at one to one point one
volts and then the frequencies we were
hitting were about three point four
gigahertz
the 3.6 gigahertz whereas normally or as
you can see even with the Box cooler it
was more like three point nine to four
point zero one seven so you're losing
300 400 500 megahertz of frequency by
going with this cooler and that's gonna
mean that you're gonna lose performance
if you're trying to do something serious
with it like render video or something
that would put a sustained load across
all cores for an extended period of time
for something like I'm gonna do an HTTP
see we're just gonna have gaming or
something like that
I think this would be just fine but it
is still not advised I would say it's it
can handle it but it's not the best idea
but I'd recommend if you guys are trying
to put together anything somewhat
similar to what I've done today is the
rise in 3700 X which is a rising seven
still third gen still uses n2 and seven
nanometer manufacturing architecture it
has a 65 watt TDP just like the risin
1700 that I used in the original video
where I tested this that will give you a
much more reasonable experience when it
comes to temperatures on Jeopardy and
the 3700 X still has really good single
core performance so it's still a great
gaming CPU rounding things out though of
course I did also play GTA 5 on the
system for over 15 minutes average
temperature on the CPU was 84 point
three degrees we did hit ninety seven
point eight degrees Celsius max so again
I wasn't monitoring frequencies during
that time period but I have a feeling
they were dialing back just a little bit
as well although the gameplay itself was
just fine didn't really encounter much
in the way of stutters or hangs or
anything like that so it was pretty
seamless when it comes to the actual
gaming experience so guys that is all I
have for you today but I really wanted
to revisit this little project with the
updated processor and see if this cooler
could handle 12 cores with the new
rising 3000 series see if you use the
answer is yes it can although it doesn't
do that great of a job so again I'd
point you towards the 3,700 X if you're
looking for something to pair this with
although I think the thing I'm gonna ask
you guys about in the comment section if
you don't leave me any feedback is are
there any other fanless coolers that you
are aware of that you've seen
implemented that you think might also be
worth trying out because the no fancy
are 95 C as mentioned only supports am
three sockets that means you need an
existing motherboard that has this a m3
and a m4 socket compatibility in order
to actually make this work so do keep
that in mind if you are looking to put
something like this together thank you
guys so much for watching this video
though the HTPC follow-up video is
coming very soon I prom
hit the thumbs up button on your way out
and we'll see you guys next time